title|No One Should Have to Sell Their Organs
date|12.07.2017
abstract|The prohibition of the sale of organs is good, but only due to the structural problems capitalism creates.
arguments|noargs
lang|en
author|site
This argument is in response to "Why can I sell everything but my organs?" (German) by Kliemt, Hartmut. He argues against the conventional arguments for prohibiting the sale of organs. I agree with him that the arguments conventionally put forward for this prohibition do not hold up to scrutiny. The argument against the sale of organs I will present is a different one, although it does fall into the category of societal consequences.
It is highly probable that the people selling their organs would be in a less favorable socioeconomic position than the ones who don't. (Rich people don't need to sell their organs for money.)
People who sell their organs have a higher risk of death and sickness than the general population, since both the operation and the lack of an or part of an organ are risk factors.
Therefore, poor people would be at a structural disadvantage not only in the conventional ways of education, nutrition, mental illness, worse medical treatment, more/harder work, but they would also have a body objectively worse than the one of people not forced to sell their organs.
Kliemt pays token respect to this, saying that one could forbid people to sell their organs out of economic duress (Although he doesn't seem committed to this), but also says that the money granted by the sale of an organ could fix the aforementioned systematic disadvantages. But this argument seems morally perverse. After all, the reasons for being poor are normally structural as well, not the fault of an individual, and the state does, in general, have the resources to significantly alleviate the systematic disadvantages the poor face. Presenting the solution to this problem in the form of worsening one's body makes the disadvantages the poor face more permanent and real, truly creating a two-class-system of citizens. Instead of just making the wealthy pay a tax to fix socioeconomic disadvantages, the poor must give up a part of their body in return.

A possible counterargument runs along the lines of "there is a societal need for more organs, and this system represents a solution where the donors can benefit, so it is worth the aforementioned problems of social hierarchy." But this ignores many other possible solutions: One could, for example, create an organ lottery (Similar to Harris' Survival Lottery, but the people only loose an organ). Or, one could create a society where the structural reasons for being poor are eliminated (or at least as much as humanly possible). In such a society, my counterargument of the social consequences wouldn't apply, and allowing the sale of organs would be, in my eyes, morally permissible.
