title|Being-Addicted (unfinished)
date|17.09.2020
abstract|Discussion of supposedly positive addictions such as workaholism has picked up in recent years, but has mainly remained parochial in its concerns. We can however frame workaholism (and a whole host of other addictions) as an addiction for positive self-identity more broadly. This forces us to confront difficult questions about the reasons we ourselves engage in our daily activities.
arguments|noargs
lang|en
author|site

It’s a late summer night, about 10pm. The last rays of sunlight have faded, the mosquitoes have settled down and the roads are black and quiet in the village. I myself am not calm. I’ve been agitatedly talking to a friend about purpose, performance, and related topics. I mention I’ve been toying with the thought of learning to sing, and he brings up that he’s planning on learning the guitar. I say that I’m kinda worried that my like for singing would get lost in my desire for improvement, and he says: “Damn, this is just gonna turn into another project, isn’t it?”

‘Project addiction’ isn’t a common term - the image it conjures is slightly too scatterbrained for a serious term. Workaholism, though, is far better known. We hear the term and picture husbands coming home at 10 pm to a quiet, dark house, a person on the perfect picturesque beach typing on their phone or laptop, $example3. We google the term and we find a bunch of articles, from diagnosis over self-help to social critique. We (speaking mostly from an american perspective) as a society have begun to look at us through the mirror of workaholism and ask ourselves what it says about our values. That is, why would one even get addicted to work? Work, per se, is probably not pleasurable. Instead, doing something that society says is good, especially doing more of it than others, makes you feel good about yourself - or maybe just less terrible. And work isn’t just something society says is good, it’s the thing society says is good, the thing that defines you. When you introduce yourself, the second thing you say is probably your job - right after your name. And while it might be hard (or at least nebulous) to excel at being a Brian (what would that even mean?), it’s much easier to define what excelling at being a developer or a manager or a tailor looks like. But, let’s rewind. We said your job is the thing that defines you. What if that’s not true?

Once, when I told my former landlady (a woman in her 60ies) that I had to buy new clothes because after going to the gym for a year straight, my old ones were getting kinda tight, she mentioned something: That that was something she had heard a few times recently, but that that was something she didn’t remember from her youth - that most of the guys were bean poles. Today, we all exercise, or if we don’t, we think we should. We all learn a foreign language, or we think we should. We all - you get the point. Now, for most people, these points remain just one more item in a life that is more and more defined by ‘hustle’. Fulfilling all these obligations can also become a ‘value addiction’: If we define addiction for our purposes as something that takes over most of your life (without you being able to stop it) and has negative consequences for your happiness, and what I’ll term ‘value addiction’ as the above plus the fact that the thing you’re addicted to is socially valued (maybe only by a subgroup), having this kind of perfect, box-checking life seems to fit the bill. But any of these boxes can also grow into their own addiction: Exercise addiction might be the second-most studied: Whether running, a martial art, bodybuilding, all of these can become something that consumes the person and makes them unhappy, even though it’s ‘something good’. fn:{https://drmarkgriffiths.wordpress.com/2014/12/04/lets-get-physical-exercise-addiction-revisited/} It’s been suggested that study addiction is often a precursor to workaholism fn:{https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/in-excess/201602/addiction-studying}, which makes sense, since one normally doesn’t stay a student forever, but the habits would remain, but this could also be understood as a value addiction in its own right. It’s probably not impossible to have way more niche value addictions, such as for creating art, or for collecting items. Research has pretty conclusively established that subcultures create their own value structures, which may be directly opposed to the value structures of the mainstream, and so there can be, and I am convinced that there are, value addictions that only make sense in relation to their subculture.

The insidious thing about value addictions is that they are based around a person’s identity. Once one identifies as a hard worker, an exceptional athlete, a straight-a student, one doesn’t want to give these things up - they make up who you are! Moreover, these things might be related to what one thinks is valuable about life - giving them up might be tantamount to giving up one’s meaning in life. If you’re doing the right thing, why should you give it up, even if it’s hurting you?
Being enmeshed in a society and its values makes it especially hard to evaluate their harmfulness and results in societal pressure to stay addicted, rather than pressure to change. If the values are relative to the subculture and actually opposed to societal values, this paradoxically might result in a double bind: You are stuck in a value addiction, but society sees this as a ‘normal addiction’, the kind that constitutes a moral failing. Therefore the help (especially the self-help) one is likely to receive is the kind that presupposes an awareness of the ‘badness’ of one’s addiction, or at least the existence of such ‘badness’, and thus will probably completely misunderstand that person. Imagine someone who collects figurines of some kind, something that gives him social status and is valued in the community, and to that end, goes into debt. In any kind of popular media, this would be framed as someone who couldn’t control his ‘pleasure impulse’ - while that person might indeed not gain much pleasure from his activities, but rather value their position as one of the foremost people in that community, and be very invested in that identity due to the sunk costs.

I’m not sure what my friend is exactly addicted to, probably something like artistic ability or success of a type. (I’m also not sure he’d like to be called addicted) However, I can be pretty sure about what I’m addicted to, namely, being good at stuff, more specifically studying or practicing to be good at stuff. With the mirror turned fully on me, what will I do? I’m not sure. I feel standard answers, such as relaxation, miss the point: If the addiction is created by a desire for value, for meaning, it seems unlikely that an explicitly meaningless activity will do much more than ameliorate the problem temporarily. Maybe this is why so many top execs are into traveling or adventure sports - seeking meaning in visceral experiences. I await your insights with bated breath.

Addendum:

Perhaps we can draw an even larger circle here: If we say that we have value addictions because of the positive identity these create, we could conceptualize the work involved in creating and maintaining that identity ‘identity labor’ (not to be confused with identity work). Conspicuous consumption would in this view also be a form of identity labor. So conceptualized, I would argue that most people are engaged in identity labor for a large part of the day. Is this the fault of modern capitalism? Maybe, but maybe that’s also the easy way out of the question: Having an identity seems to me a desire not only extant in capitalism. Certainly though, the more a person gets hired not solely based on their relevant skillset, but as a whole person, the more identity labor is financially incentivized. Certainly, the desire to have clearly enumerable interests for things like Tinder profiles is also a pull force towards identity labor. Capitalist or not, identity labor precludes pure enjoyment and probably reduces enjoyment generally, as one assesses activities based on how they fit your current identity.
