title|The Ties That Bind (unfinished)
date|17.08.2020
abstract|Loneliness is a problem that will haunt us long after the coronavirus pandemic has passed. The current generations have found new ways to associate, come together, and love - but the norms making these structures permanent and binding have not always caught up. In the short term, we can always find new friends, new mentors, new lovers. But what happens when we're less strong?
arguments|noargs
lang|en
author|site

## Introduction: Hypocrisy and Weakness

Any story of human relationships must necessarily be personal, any article written in 2020 must necessarily feature coronavirus. Thus, let us begin our story in the house I grew up in, in February 2020. I had, for other mental health reasons returned to this house in Munich in the beginning of January, and so I was here when the coronavirus pandemic began in earnest. That is: In a situation of difficulty and crisis, I relied on my parents. This might not strike anyone as odd, but it is fundamentally problematic - but to find out why, we need to travel back in time a bit.
I moved to Berlin in 2017. A bit overwhelmed and scared by the city at first, by the person suddenly preaching a monologue about his illness to the whole S-Bahn car, the offhand comment about taking cocaine in someone's anecdote, the club that people mentioned where people would have sex in the open. Gradually, I began trying things out, not just the crazy stuff, but different activities, art forms, academic disciplines. While exactly what I value has shifted over the years, on a basic level, things such as artistic expression, free and liberal thinking, travel, learning, these are the things I value. In contrast, I have always felt family to be stifling, boring, more a responsibility then a joy. In this, I neatly fit into the category of 'every college kid since college was invented.' And yet, I think there is a marked difference here, between me and the college life of some kid 50, 100, 200 years ago: Alexander Hamilton probably felt the same way I did at college - and then he settled down, had children, and had a normal, wholesome family life (with at least one affair, but who's counting). Probably this was the case for most of his classmates as well. But this is not a given for young people these days. In some essential way, self-expression and freedom have become so valuable to us, and our intellectual climate is open enough for us to try out different forms of relationships. Others might hold people at arms length precicely because they don't want the kind of typical relationships (romantic, platonic, or other) they see exist, but don't know what other relationships might be possible (for the record, I don't know either.) In lieu of family, people might get very close to their flatmates, or with a very dedicated group for a certain hobby or interest. In essence, they are looking at their relationships and trying to put their values into practice. To me, and probably to many of them, there is no alternative: The pain of not living these values in one's relationships is too great. But there's a catch.
In a great passage that I cannot find, the author remarks that if, in a typical romantic relationship, your partner wanted to move, perhaps for a great opportunity of some kind, you would be expected to be consulted, and if you had objections, voicing them would be considered normal, even good. If a friend wants to move for such an opportunity, however, you would be expected to say something like "Wow, that's great! You should definitely go!" That is, friendships are not the kind of relationships that incur the obligation to stay close to your friends, and are subordinate to greater life goals and opportunities.
These ideas are social norms associated with romantic relationships and friendships, respectively. As we do things, however, that replace stultifying relationships with family with friendships, or try out new forms of relationships, since the norms are so permissible, or there are no established norms at all, we might find ourselves on slippery ground. And when we slip, we might slide into the arms of the relationships we thought we had left behind.
One year before the corona-crisis, I had my tonsils removed. It's not a great process, and expending too much effort in the following weeks can lead to a potentially deadly reopening of the wound. In summary: You need help. For me, without really being prompted, my mom came up to Berlin to take care of me for the week following the operation. Good riddance, too: While a few friends showed up for a bit, there would have been no one I could have asked to take on that kind of burden - even if it was mostly just buying pudding I could eat. This, then, is the reason I found myself in Munich during the Coronacrisis, and the crux of the issue: If we have friends or other relationships, in the good times, we can stave off loneliness and be (moderately) happy. But if we are committed to building a life and relationships that fulfill us more, to break out of the mold of marriage, family, and childrearing, we cannot count on all times being good times. If we don't want to be hypocrites, who enjoy our time with the people who we share much in common with but fall back on family once time gets tough, we have to ask ourselves: How do we build these relationships, the ones with fulfillment, but also the ties that bind? Let's try to find an answer.

To be continued.
